I was born in the city of Bombay… once upon a time. No, that won't do, there's no getting away from
the date: I was born in Doctor Narlikar's Nursing Home on August 15th, 1947. And the time? The time
matters, too. Well then: at night. No, it's important to be more… On the stroke of midnight, as a matter of
fact. Clock-hands joined palms in respectful greeting as I came. Oh, spell it out, spell it out: at the precise
instant of India's arrival at independence, I tumbled forth into the world. There were gasps. And, outside the
window, fireworks and crowds. A few seconds later, my father broke his big toe; but Ms accident was a
mere trifle when set beside what had befallen me in that benighted moment, because thanks to the occult
tyrannies of those blandly saluting clocks I had been mysteriously handcuffed to history, my destinies
indissolubly chained to those of my country. For the next three decades, there was to be no escape.
Soothsayers had prophesied me, newspapers celebrated my arrival, politicos ratified my authenticity. I was
left entirely without a say in the matter. I, Saleem Sinai, later variously called Snotnose, Stainface, Baldy,
Sniffer, Buddha and even Piece-of-the-Moon, had become heavily embroiled in Fate-at the best of times a
dangerous sort of involvement. And I couldn't even wipe my own nose at the time.
Now, however, time (having no further use for me) is running out. I will soon be thirty-one years old.
Perhaps. If my crumbling, over-used body permits. But I have no hope of saving my life, nor can I count on
having even a thousand nights and a night. I must work fast, faster than Scheherazade, if I am to end up
meaning-yes, meaning-something. I admit it: above all things, I fear absurdity.
And there are so many stories to tell,-too many, such an excess of intertwined lives events miracles
places rumours, so dense a commingling of the improbable and the mundane! I have been a swallower of
lives; and to know me, just the one of me, you'll have to swallow the lot as well. Consumed multitudes are
jostling and shoving inside me; and guided only by the memory of a large white bedsheet with a roughly
circular hole some seven inches in diameter cut into the centre, clutching at the dream of that holey,
mutilated square of linen, which is my talisman, my open-sesame, I must commence the business of
remaking my life from the point at which it really began, some thirty-two years before anything as obvious,
as present, as my clock-ridden, crime-stained birth.
(The sheet, incidentally, is stained too, with three drops of old, faded redness. As the Quran tells us:
Recite, in the name of the Lord thy Creator, who created Man from clots of blood.)
One Kashmiri morning in the early spring of 1915, my grandfather Aadam Aziz hit his nose against a
frost-hardened tussock of earth while attempting to pray. Three drops of blood plopped out of his left nostril,
hardened instantly in the brittle air and lay before his eyes on the prayer-mat, transformed into rubies.
Lurching back until he knelt with his head once more upright, he found that the tears which had sprung to
his eyes had solidified, too; and at that moment, as he brushed diamonds contemptuously from his lashes, he
resolved never again to kiss earth for any god or man. This decision, however, made a hole in him, a
vacancy in a vital inner chamber, leaving him vulnerable to women and history. Unaware of this at first,
despite his recently completed medical training, he stood up, rolled the prayer-mat into a thick cheroot, and
holding it under his right arm surveyed the valley through clear, diamond-free eyes.
The world was new again. After a winter's gestation in its eggshell of ice, the valley had beaked its
way out into the open, moist and yellow. The new grass bided its time underground; the mountains were
retreating to their hill-stations for the warm season. (In the winter, when the valley shrank under the ice, the
mountains closed in and snarled like angry jaws around the city on the lake.)
In those days the radio mast had not been built and the temple of Sankara Acharya, a little black blister
on a khaki hill, still dominated the streeets and lake of Srinagar. In those days there was no army camp at the
lakeside, no endless snakes of camouflaged trucks and jeeps clogged the narrow mountain roads, no soldiers
hid behind the crests of the mountains past Baramulla and Gulmarg. In those days travellers were not shot as
spies if they took photographs of bridges, and apart from the Englishmen's houseboats on the lake, the valley
had hardly changed since the Mughal Empire, for all its springtime renewals; but my grandfather's
eyes-which were, like the rest of him, twenty-five years old-saw things differently… and his nose had
started to itch.
To reveal the secret of my grandfather's altered vision: he had spent five years, five springs, away
from home. (The tussock of earth, crucial though its presence was as it crouched under a chance wrinkle of
the prayer-mat, was at bottom no more than a catalyst.) Now, returning, he saw through travelled eyes.
Instead of the beauty of the tiny valley circled by giant teeth, he noticed the narrowness, the proximity of the
horizon; and felt sad, to be at home and feel so utterly enclosed. He also felt-inexplicably-as though the old
place resented his educated, stethoscoped return. Beneath the winter ice, it had been coldly neutral, but now
there was no doubt; the years in Germany had returned him to a hostile environment. Many years later, when
the hole inside him had been clogged up with hate, and he came to sacrifice himself at the shrine of the black
stone god in the temple on the hill, he would try and recall his childhood springs in Paradise, the way it was
before travel and tussocks and army tanks messed everything up.
On the morning when the valley, gloved in a prayer-mat, punched him on the nose, he had been trying,
absurdly, to pretend that nothing had changed. So he had risen in the bitter cold of four-fifteen, washed
himself in the prescribed fashion, dressed and put on his father's astrakhan cap; after which he had carried
the rolled cheroot of the prayer-mat into the small lakeside garden in front of their old dark house and
unrolled it over the waiting tussock. The ground felt deceptively soft under his feet and made him
simultaneously uncertain and unwary. 'In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful…'-the
exordium, spoken with hands joined before him like a book, comforted a part of him, made another, larger
part feel uneasy-'… Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Creation…'-but now Heidelberg invaded his head; here
was Ingrid, briefly his Ingrid, her face scorning him for this Mecca-turned parroting; here, their friends
Oskar and Ilse Lubin the anarchists, mocking his prayer with their anti-ideologies-'…The Compassionate,
the Merciful, King of the Last Judgment!…'-Heidelberg, in which, along with medicine and politics, he
learned that India-like radium-had been 'discovered' by the Europeans; even Oskar was filled with
admiration for Vasco da Gama, and this was what finally separated Aadam Aziz from his friends, this belief
of theirs that he was somehow the invention of their ancestors-'…You alone we worship, and to You alone
we pray for help…'-so here he was, despite their presence in his head, attempting to re-unite himself with an
earlier self which ignored their influence but knew everything it ought to have known, about submission for
example, about what he was doing now, as his hands, guided by old memories, fluttered upwards, thumbs
pressed to ears, fingers spread, as he sank to his knees-'… Guide us to the straight path, The path of those
whom You have favoured… 'But it was no good, he was caught in a strange middle ground, trapped
between belief and disbelief, and this was only a charade after all-'… Not of those who have incurred Your
wrath, Nor of those who have gone astray.' My grandfather bent his forehead towards the earth. Forward he
bent, and the earth, prayer-mat-covered, curved up towards him. And now it was the tussock's time. At one
and the same time a rebuke from Ilse-Oskar-Ingrid-Heidelberg as well as valley-and-God, it smote him upon
the point of the nose. Three drops fell. There were rubies and diamonds. And my grandfather, lurching
upright, made a resolve. Stood. Rolled cheroot. Stared across the lake. And was knocked forever into that
middle place, unable to worship a God in whose existence he could not wholly disbelieve. Permanent
alteration: a hole.
The young, newly-qualified Doctor Aadam Aziz stood facing the springtime lake, sniffing the whiffs
of change; while his back (which was extremely straight) was turned upon yet more changes. His father had
had a stroke in his absence abroad, and his mother had kept it a secret. His mother's voice, whispering
stoically: '…Because your studies were too important, son.' This mother, who had spent her life housebound,
in purdah, had suddenly found enormous strength and gone out to run the small gemstone business
(turquoises, rubies, diamonds) which had put Aadam through medical college, with the help of a
scholarship; so he returned to find the seemingly immutable order of his family turned upside down, his
mother going out to work while his father sat hidden behind the veil which the stroke had dropped over his
brain… in a wooden chair, in a darkened room, he sat and made bird-noises. Thirty different species of birds
visited him and sat on the sill outside his shuttered window conversing about this and that. He seemed happy
enough.
(… And already I can see the repetitions beginning; because didn't my grandmother also find
enormous… and the stroke, too, was not the only… and the Brass Monkey had her birds… the curse begins
already, and we haven't even got to the noses yet!)
The lake was no longer frozen over. The thaw had come rapidly, as usual; many of the small boats, the
shikaras, had been caught napping, which was also normal. But while these sluggards slept on, on dry land,
snoring peacefully beside their owners, the oldest boat was up at the crack as old folk often are, and was
therefore the first craft to move across the unfrozen lake. Tai's shikara… this, too, was customary.
Watch how the old boatman, Tai, makes good time through the misty water, standing stooped over at
the back of his craft! How his oar, a wooden heart on a yellow stick, drives jerkily through the weeds!
In these parts he's considered very odd because he rows standing up… among other reasons. Tai,
bringing an urgent summons to Doctor Aziz, is about to set history in motion… while Aadam, looking down
into the water, recalls what Tai taught him years ago: 'The ice is always waiting, Aadam baba, just under the
water's skin.' Aadam's eyes are a clear blue, the astonishing blue of mountain sky, which has a habit of
dripping into the pupils of Kashmir! men; they have not forgotten how to look. They see-there! like the
skeleton of a ghost, just beneath the surface of Lake Dali-the delicate tracery, the intricate crisscross of
colourless lines, the cold waiting veins of the future. His German years, which have blurred so much else,
haven't deprived him of the gift of seeing. Tai's gift. He looks up, sees the approaching V of Tai's boat,
waves a greeting. Tai's arm rises-but this is a command. 'Wait!' My grandfather waits; and during this hiatus,
as he experiences the last peace of his life, a muddy, ominous sort of peace, I had better get round to
describing him.
Keeping out of my voice the natural envy of the ugly man for the strikingly impressive, I record that
Doctor Aziz was a tall man. Pressed flat against a wall of his family home, he measured twenty-five bricks
(a brick for each year of his life), or just over six foot two. A strong man also. His beard was thick and
red-and annoyed his mother, who said only Hajis, men who had made the pilgrimage to Mecca, should grow
red beards. His hair, however, was rather darker. His sky-eyes you know about. Ingrid had said, They went
mad with the colours when they made your face.' But the central feature of my grandfather's anatomy was
neither colour nor height, neither strength of arm nor straightness of back. There it was, reflected in the
water, undulating like a mad plantain in the centre of his face… Aadam Aziz, waiting for Tai, watches his
rippling nose. It would have dominated less dramatic faces than his easily; even on him, it is what one sees
first and remembers longest. 'A cyranose,' Ilse Lubin said, and Oskar added, 'A proboscissimus.' Ingrid
announced, 'You could cross a river on that nose.' (Its bridge was wide.)
My grandfather's nose: nostrils flaring, curvaceous as dancers. Between them swells the nose's
triumphal arch, first up and out, then down and under, sweeping in to his upper lip with a superb and at
present red-tipped flick. An easy nose to hit a tussock with. I wish to place on record my gratitude to this
mighty organ-if not for it, who would ever have believed me to be truly my mother's son, my grandfather's
grandson?-this colossal apparatus which was to be my birthright, too. Doctor Aziz's nose-comparable only
to the trunk of the elephant-headed god Ganesh-established incontrovertibly his right to be a patriarch. It
was Tai who taught him that, too. When young Aadam was barely past puberty the dilapidated boatman
said, That's a nose to start a family on, my princeling. There'd be no mistaking whose brood they were.
Mughal Emperors would have given their right hands for noses like that one. There are dynasties waiting
inside it,'-and here Tai lapsed into coarseness-'like snot.'
On Aadam Aziz, the nose assumed a patriarchal aspect. On my mother, it looked noble and a little
long-suffering; on my aunt Emerald, snobbish; on my aunt Alia, intellectual; on my uncle Hanif it was the
organ of an unsuccessful genius; my uncle Mustapha made it a second-rater's sniffer; the Brass Monkey
escaped it completely; but on me-on me, it was something else again. But I mustn't reveal all my secrets at
once.
(Tai is getting nearer. He, who revealed the power of the nose, and who is now bringing my
grandfather the message which will catapult him into his future, is stroking his shikara through the early
morning lake…)
Nobody could remember when Tai had been young. He had been plying this same boat, standing in the
same hunched position, across the Dal and Nageen Lakes… forever. As far as anyone knew. He lived
somewhere in the insanitary bowels of the old wooden-house quarter and his wife grew lotus roots and other
curious vegetables on one of the many 'floating gardens' lilting on the surface of the spring and summer
water. Tai himself cheerily admitted he had no idea of his age. Neither did his wife-he was, she said, already
leathery when they married. His face was a sculpture of wind on water: ripples made of hide. He had two
golden teeth and no others. In the town, he had few friends. Few boatmen or traders invited him to share a
hookah when he floated past the shikara moorings or one of the lakes' many ramshackle, waterside
provision-stores and tea-shops.
The general opinion of Tai had been voiced long ago by Aadam Aziz's father the gemstone merchant:
'His brain fell out with his teeth.' (But now old Aziz sahib sat lost in bird tweets while Tai simply, grandly,
continued.) It was an impression the boatman fostered by his chatter, which was fantastic, grandiloquent and
ceaseless, and as often as not addressed only to himself. Sound carries over water, and the lake people
giggled at his monologues; but with undertones of awe, and even fear. Awe, because the old halfwit knew
the lakes and hills better than any of his detractors; fear, because of his claim to an antiquity so immense it
defied numbering, and moreover hung so lightly round his chicken's neck that it hadn't prevented him from
winning a highly desirable wife and fathering four sons upon her… and a few more, the story went, on other
lakeside wives. The young bucks at the shikara moorings were convinced he had a pile of money hidden
away somewhere-a hoard, perhaps, of priceless golden teeth, rattling in a sack like walnuts. Years later,
when Uncle Puffs tried to sell me his daughter by offering to have her teeth drawn and replaced in gold, I
thought of Tai's forgotten treasure… and, as a child, Aadam Aziz had loved him.
He made his living as a simple ferryman, despite all the rumours of wealth, taking hay and goats and
vegetables and wood across the lakes for cash; people, too. When he was running his taxi-service he erected
a pavilion in the centre of the shikara, a gay affair of flowered-patterned curtains and canopy, with cushions
to match; and deodorised his boat with incense. The sight of Tai's shikara approaching, curtains flying, had
always been for Doctor Aziz one of the defining images of the coming of spring. Soon the English sahibs
would arrive and Tai would ferry them to the Shalimar Gardens and the King's Spring, chattering and pointy
and stooped. He was the living antithesis of Oskar-Ilse-Ingrid's belief in the inevitability of change… a
quirky, enduring familiar spirit of the valley. A watery Caliban, rather too fond of cheap Kashmiri brandy.
Memory of my blue bedroom wall: on which, next to the P.M.'s letter, the Boy Raleigh hung for many
years, gazing rapturously at an old fisherman in what looked like a red dhoti, who sat
on-what?-driftwood?-and pointed out to sea as he told his fishy tales… and the Boy Aadam, my
grandfather-to-be, fell in love with the boatman Tai precisely because of the endless verbiage which made
others think him cracked. It was magical talk, words pouring from him like fools' money, past Ms two gold
teeth, laced with hiccups and brandy, soaring up to the most remote Himalayas of the past, then swooping
shrewdly on some present detail, Aadam's nose for instance, to vivisect its meaning like a mouse. TMs
friendship had plunged Aadam into hot water with great regularity. (Boiling water. Literally. While his
mother said, 'We'll kill that boatman's bugs if it kills you.') But still the old soliloquist would dawdle in Ms
boat at the garden's lakeside toes and Aziz would sit at Ms feet until voices summoned Mm indoors to be
lectured on Tai's filthiness and warned about the pillaging armies of germs Ms mother envisaged leaping
from that hospitably ancient body on to her son's starched white loose-pajamas. But always Aadam returned
to the water's edge to scan the mists for the ragged reprobate's hunched-up frame steering its magical boat
through the enchanted waters of the morning.
'But how old are you really, Taiji?' (Doctor Aziz, adult, redbearded, slanting towards the future,
remembers the day he asked the unaskable question.) For an instant, silence, noisier than a waterfall. The
monologue, interrupted. Slap of oar in water. He was riding in the shikara with Tai, squatting amongst goats,
on a pile of straw, in full knowledge of the stick and bathtub waiting for him at home. He had come for
stories-and with one question had silenced the storyteller.
'No, tell, Taiji, how old, truly? And now a brandy bottle, materialising from nowhere: cheap liquor
from the folds of the great warm chugha-coat. Then a shudder, a belch, a glare. Glint of gold. And-at
last!-speech. 'How old? You ask how old, you little wet-head, you nosey…' Tai, forecasting the fisherman
on my wall, pointed at the mountains. 'So old, nakkoo!' Aadam, the nakkoo, the nosey one, followed his
pointing finger. 'I have watched the mountains being born; I have seen Emperors die. Listen. Listen,
nakkoo…'-the brandy bottle again, followed by brandy-voice, and words more intoxicating than booze-'… I
saw that Isa, that Christ, when he came to Kashmir. Smile, smile, it is your history I am keeping in my head.
Once it was set down in old lost books. Once I knew where there was a grave with pierced feet carved on the
tombstone, which bled once a year. Even my memory is going now; but I know, although I can't read.'
Illiteracy, dismissed with a flourish; literature crumbled beneath the rage of his sweeping hand. Which
sweeps again to chugha-pocket, to brandy bottle, to lips chapped with cold. Tai always had woman's lips.
'Nakkoo, listen, listen. I have seen plenty. Yara, you should've seen that Isa when he came, beard down to
his balls, bald as an egg on his head. He was old and fagged-out but he knew his manners. 'You first, Taiji,'
he'd say, and 'Please to sit'; always a respectful tongue, he never called me crackpot, never called me tu
either. Always aap. Polite, see? And what an appetite! Such a hunger, I would catch my ears in fright. Saint
or devil, I swear he could eat a whole kid in one go. And so what? I told him, eat, fill your hole, a man
comes to Kashmir to enjoy life, or to end it, or both. His work was finished. He just came up here to live it
up a little.' Mesmerized by this brandied portrait of a bald, gluttonous Christ, Aziz listened, later repeating
every word to the consternation of his parents, who dealt in stones and had no time for 'gas'.
'Oh, you don't believe?'-licking his sore lips with a grin, knowing it to be the reverse of the truth; 'Your
attention is wandering?'-again, he knew how furiously Aziz was hanging on his words. 'Maybe the straw is
pricking your behind, hey? Oh, I'm so sorry, babaji, not to provide for you silk cushions with gold
brocade-work-cushions such as the Emperor Jehangir sat upon! You think of the Emperor Jehangir as a
gardener only, no doubt,' Tai accused my grandfather, 'because he built Shalimar. Stupid! What do you
know? His name meant Encompasser of the Earth. Is that a gardener's name? God knows what they teach
you boys these days. Whereas I'… puffing up a little here ..'I knew his precise weight, to the tola! Ask me
how many maunds, how many seers! When he was happy he got heavier and in Kashmir he was heaviest of
all. I used to carry his litter… no, no, look, you don't believe again, that big cucumber in your face is
waggling like the little one in your pajamas! So, come on, come on, ask me questions! Give examination!
Ask how many times the leather thongs wound round the handles of the litter-the answer is thirty-one. Ask
me what was the Emperor's dying word-I tell you it was 'Kashmir'. He had bad breath and a good heart. Who
do you think I am? Some common ignorant lying pie-dog? Go, get out of the boat now, your nose makes it
too heavy to row; also your father is waiting to beat my gas out of you, and your mother to boil off your
skin.'
In the brandy bottle of the boatman Tai I see, foretold, my own father's possession by djinns… and
there will be another bald foreigner… and Tai's gas prophesies another kind, which was the consolation of
my grandmother's old age, and taught her stories, too… and pie-dogs aren't far away… Enough. I'm
frightening myself. Despite beating and boiling, Aadam Aziz floated with Tai in his shikara, again and
again, amid goats hay flowers furniture lotus-roots, though never with the English sahibs, and heard again
and again the miraculous answers to that single terrifying question: 'But Taiji, how old are you, honestly?
From Tai, Aadam learned the secrets of the lake-where you could swim without being pulled down by
weeds; the eleven varieties of water-snake; where the frogs spawned; how to cook a lotus-root; and where
the three English women had drowned a few years back. There is a tribe of feringhee women who come to
this water to drown,' Tai said. 'Sometimes they know it, sometimes they don't, but I know the minute I smell
them. They hide under the water from God knows what or who-but they can't hide from me, baba!' Tai's
laugh, emerging to infect Aadam-a huge, booming laugh that seemed macabre when it crashed out of that
old, withered body, but which was so natural in my giant grandfather that nobody knew, in later times, that it
wasn't really his (my uncle Hanif inherited this laugh; so until he died, a piece of Tai lived in Bombay). And,
also from Tai, my grandfather heard about noses.
Tai tapped his left nostril. 'You know what this is nakkoo? It's the place where the outside world meets
the world inside you. If they don't get on, you feel it here. Then you rub your nose with embarrassment to
make the itch go away. A nose like that, little idiot, is a great gift. I say: trust it. When it warns you, look out
or you'll be finished. Follow your nose and you'll go far.' He cleared his throat; his eyes rolled away into the
mountains of the past. Aziz settled back on the straw. 'I knew one officer once-in the army of that Iskandar
the Great. Never mind his name. He had a vegetable just like yours hanging between his eyes. When the
army halted near Gandhara, he fell in love with some local floozy. At once his nose itched like crazy. He
scratched it, but that was useless. He inhaled vapours from crushed boiled eucalyptus leaves. Still no good,
baba! The itching sent him wild; but the damn fool dug in his heels and stayed with his little witch when the
army went home. He became-what?-a stupid thing, neither this nor that, a half-and-halfer with a nagging
wife and an itch in the nose, and in the end he pushed his sword into his stomach. What do you think of
that?'
…Doctor Aziz in 1915, whom rubies and diamonds have turned into a half-and-halfer, remembers this
story as Tai enters hailing distance. His nose is itching still. He scratches, shrugs, tosses his head; and then
Tai shouts.
'Ohe! Doctor Sahib! Ghani the landowner's daughter is sick.'
The message, delivered curtly, shouted unceremoniously across the surface of the lake although
boatman and pupil have not met for half a decade, mouthed by woman's lips that are not smiling in
long-time-no-see greeting, sends time into a speeding, whirligig, blurry fluster of excitement…
…'Just think, son,' Aadam's mother is saying as she sips fresh lime water, reclining on a takht in an
attitude of resigned exhaustion, 'how life does turn out. For so many years even my ankles were a secret, and
now I must be stared at by strange persons who are not even family members.'
…While Ghani the landowner stands beneath a large oil painting of Diana the Huntress, framed in
squiggly gold. He wears thick dark glasses and his famous poisonous smile, and discussed art. 'I purchased it
from an Englishman down on his luck, Doctor Sahib. Five hundred rupees only-and I did not trouble to beat
him down. What are five hundred chips? You see, I am a lover of culture.'
… 'See, my son,' Aadam's mother is saying as he begins to examine her, 'what a mother will not do for
her child. Look how I suffer. You are a doctor… feel these rashes, these blotchy bits, understand that my
head aches morning noon and night. Refill my glass, child.'
… But the young Doctor has entered the throes of a most un-hippocratic excitement at the boatman's
cry, and shouts, 'I'm coming just now! Just let me bring my things!' The shikara's prow touches the garden's
hem. Aadam is rushing indoors, prayer-mat rolled like cheroot under one arm, blue eyes blinking in the
sudden interior gloom; he has placed the cheroot on a high shelf on top of stacked copies of Vorwarts and
Lenin's What Is To Be Done? and other pamphlets, dusty echoes of his half-faded German life; he is pulling
out, from under his bed, a second-hand leather case which his mother called his 'doctori-attache', and as he
swings it and himself upwards and runs from the room, the word heidelberg is briefly visible, burned into
the leather on the bottom of the bag. A landowner's daughter is good news indeed to a doctor with a career
to make, even if she is ill. No: because she is ill.
… While I sit like an empty pickle jar in a pool of Anglepoised light, visited by this vision of my
grandfather sixty-three years ago, which demands to be recorded, filling my nostrils with the acrid stench of
his mother's embarrassment which has brought her out in boils, with the . vinegary force of Aadam Aziz's
determination to establish a practice so successful that she'll never have to return to the gemstone-shop, with
the blind mustiness of a big shadowy house in which the young Doctor stands, ill-at-ease, before a painting
of a plain girl with lively eyes and a stag transfixed behind her on the horizon, speared by a dart from her
bow. Most of what matters in our lives takes place in our absence: but I seem to have found from
somewhere the trick of filling in the gaps in my knowledge, so that everything is in my head, down to the
last detail, such as the way the mist seemed to slant across the early morning air… everything, and not just
the few clues one stumbles across, for instance by opening an old tin trunk which should have remained
cobwebby and closed.
… Aadam refills his mother's glass and continues, worriedly, to examine her. Tut some cream on these
rashes and blotches, Amma. .. For the headache, there are pills. The boils must be lanced. But maybe if you
wore purdah when you sat in the store… so that no disrespectful eyes could… such complaints often begin
in the mind…'
… Slap of oar in water. Plop of spittle in lake. Tai clears his throat and mutters angrily, 'A fine
business. A wet-head nakkoo child goes away before he's learned one damn thing and he comes back a big
doctor sahib with a big bag full of foreign machines, and he's still as silly as an owl. I swear: a too bad
business.'
… Doctor Aziz is shifting uneasily, from foot to foot, under the influence of the landowner's smile, in
whose presence it is not possible to feel relaxed; and is waiting for some tic of reaction to his own
extraordinary appearance. He has grown accustomed to these involuntary twitches of surprise at his size, his
face of many colours, his nose… but Ghani makes no sign, and the young Doctor resolves, in return, not to
let his uneasiness show. He stops shifting his weight. They face each other, each suppressing (or so it seems)
his view of the other, establishing the basis of their future relationship. And now Ghani alters, changing
from an art-lover to tough-guy. 'This is a big chance for you, young man,' he says. Aziz's eyes have strayed
to Diana. Wide expanses of her blemished pink skin are visible.
… His mother is moaning, shaking her head. 'No, what do you know, child, you have become a
big-shot doctor but the gemstone business is different. Who would buy a turquoise from a woman hidden
inside a black hood? It is a question of establishing trust. So they must look at me; and I must get pains and
boils. Go, go, don't worry your head about your poor mother.'
… 'Big shot,' Tai is spitting into the lake, 'big bag, big shot. Pah! We haven't got enough bags at home
that you must bring back that thing made of a pig's skin that makes one unclean just by looking at it? And
inside, God knows what all.' Doctor Aziz, seated amongst flowery curtains and the smell of incense, has his
thoughts wrenched away from the patient waiting across the lake. Tai's bitter monologue breaks into his
consciousness, creating a sense of dull shock, a smell like a casualty ward overpowering the incense… the
old man is clearly furious about something, possessed by an incomprehensible rage that appears to be
directed at his erstwhile acolyte, or, more precisely and oddly, at his bag. Doctor Aziz attempts to make
small talk… 'Your wife is well? Do they still talk about your bag of golden teeth?'… tries to remake an old
friendship; but Tai is in full flight now, a stream of invective pouring out of him. The Heidelberg bag quakes
under the torrent of abuse. 'Sistersleeping pigskin bag from Abroad full of foreigners' tricks. Big-shot bag.
Now if a man breaks an arm that bag will not let the bone-setter bind it in leaves. Now a man must let his
wife lie beside that bag and watch knives come and cut her open. A fine business, what these foreigners put
in our young men's heads. I swear: it is a too-bad thing. That bag should fry in Hell with the testicles of the
ungodly.'
… Ghani the landowner snaps his braces with his thumbs. 'A big chance, yes indeed. They are saying
good things about you in town. Good medical training. Good… good enough… family. And now our own
lady doctor is sick so you get your opportunity. That woman, always sick these days, too old, I am thinking,
and not up in the latest developments also, what-what? I say: physician heal thyself. And I tell you this: I am
wholly objective in my business relations. Feelings, love, I keep for my family only. If a person is not doing
a first-class job for me, out she goes! You understand me? So: my daughter Naseem is not well. You will
treat her excellently. Remember I have friends; and ill-health strikes high and low alike.'
… 'Do you still pickle water-snakes in brandy to give you virility, Taiji? Do you still like to eat
lotus-root without any spices?' Hesitant questions, brushed aside by the torrent of Tai's fury. Doctor Aziz
begins to diagnose. To the ferryman, the bag represents Abroad; it is the alien thing, the invader, progress.
And yes, it has indeed taken possession of the young Doctor's mind; and yes, it contains knives, and cures
for cholera and malaria and smallpox; and yes, it sits between doctor and boatman, and has made them
antagonists. Doctor Aziz begins to fight, against sadness, and against Tai's anger, which is beginning to
infect him, to become his own, which erupts only rarely, but comes, when it does come, unheralded in a roar
from bis deepest places, laying waste everything in sight; and then vanishes, leaving him wondering why
everyone is so upset… They are approaching Ghani's house. A bearer awaits the shikara, standing with
clasped hands on a little wooden jetty. Aziz fixes his mind on the job in hand.
… 'Has your usual doctor agreed to my visit, Ghani Sahib?'… Again, a hesitant question is brushed
lightly aside. The landowner says, 'Oh, she will agree. Now follow me, please.'
… The bearer is waiting on the jetty. Holding the shikara steady as Aadam Aziz climbs out, bag in
hand. And now, at last, Tai speaks directly to my grandfather. Scorn in his face, Tai asks, 'Tell me this,
Doctor Sahib: have you got in that bag made of dead pigs one of those machines that foreign doctors use to
smell with?' Aadam shakes his head, not understanding. Tai's voice gathers new layers of disgust. 'You
know, sir, a thing like an elephant's trunk.' Aziz, seeing what he means, replies: 'A stethoscope? Naturaly.'
Tai pushes the shikara off from the jetty. Spits. Begins to row away. 'I knew it,' he says. 'You will use such a
machine now, instead of your own big nose.'
My grandfather does not trouble to explain that a stethoscope is more like a pair of ears than & nose.
He is stifling his own irritation, the resentful anger of a cast-off child; and besides, there is a patient waiting.
Time settles down and concentrates on the importance of the moment.
The house was opulent but badly lit. Ghani was a widower and the servants clearly took advantage.
There were cobwebs in corners and layers of dust on ledges. They walked down a long corridor; one of the
doors was ajar and through it Aziz saw a room in a state of violent disorder. This glimpse, connected with a
glint of light in Ghani's dark glasses, suddenly informed Aziz that the landowner was blind. This aggravated
his sense of unease: a blind man who claimed to appreciate European paintings? He was, also, impressed,
because Ghani hadn't bumped into anything… they halted outside a thick teak door. Ghani said, 'Wait here
two moments,' and went into the room behind the door.
In later years, Doctor Aadam Aziz swore that during those two moments of solitude in the gloomy
spidery corridors of the landowner's mansion he was gripped by an almost uncontrollable desire to turn and
run away as fast as his legs would carry him. Unnerved by the enigma of the blind art-lover, his insides
filled with tiny scrabbling insects as a result of the insidious venom of Tai's mutterings, his nostrils itching
to the point of convincing him that he had somehow contracted venereal disease, he felt his feet begin
slowly, as though encased in boots of lead, to turn; felt blood pounding in his temples; and was seized by so
powerful a sensation of standing upon a point of no return that he very nearly wet his German woollen
trousers. He began, without knowing it, to blush furiously; and at this point his mother appeared before him,
seated on the floor before a low desk, a rash spreading like a blush across her face as she held a turquoise up
to the light. His mother's face had acquired all the scorn of the boatman Tai. 'Go, go, run,' she told him in
Tai's voice, 'Don't worry about your poor old mother.' Doctor Aziz found himself stammering, 'What a
useless son you've got, Amma; can't you see there's a hole in the middle of me the size of a melon?' His
mother smiled a pained smile. 'You always were a heartless boy,' she sighed, and then turned into a lizard on
the wall of the corridor and stuck her tongue out at him. Doctor Aziz stopped feeling dizzy, became unsure
that he'd actually spoken aloud, wondered what he'd meant by that business about the hole, found that his
feet were no longer trying to escape, and realized that he was being watched. A woman with the biceps of a
wrestler was staring at him, beckoning him to follow her into the room. The state of her sari told him that
she was a servant; but she was not servile. 'You look green as a fish,' she said. 'You young doctors. You
come into a strange house and your liver turns tojelly. Come, Doctor Sahib, they are waiting for you.'
Clutching his bag a fraction too tightly, he followed her through the dark teak door.
… Into a spacious bedchamber that was as ill-lit as the rest of the house; although here there were
shafts of dusty sunlight seeping in through a fanlight high on one wall. These fusty rays illuminated a scene
as remarkable as anything the Doctor had ever witnessed: a tableau of such surpassing strangeness that his
feet began to twitch towards the door once again. Two more women, also built like professional wrestlers,
stood stiffly in the light, each holding one corner of an enormous white bedsheet, their arms raised high
above their heads so that the sheet hung between them like a curtain. Mr Ghani welled up out of the murk
surrounding the sunlit sheet and permitted the nonplussed Aadam to stare stupidly at the peculiar tableau for
perhaps half a minute, at the end of which, and before a word had been spoken, the Doctor made a
discovery:
In the very centre of the sheet, a hole had been cut, a crude circle about seven inches in diameter.
'Close the door, ayah,' Ghani instructed the first of the lady wrestlers, and then, turning to Aziz,
became confidential. This town contains many good-for-nothings who have on occasion tried to climb into
my daughter's room. She needs,' he nodded at the three musclebound women, 'protectors.'
Aziz was still looking at the perforated sheet. Ghani said, 'All right, come on, you will examine my
Naseem right now. Pronto.'
My grandfather peered around the room. 'But where is she, Ghani Sahib?' he blurted out finally. The
lady wrestlers adopted supercilious expressions and, it seemed to him, tightened their musculatures, just in
case he intended to try something fancy.
'Ah, I see your confusion,' Ghani said, his poisonous smile broadening, 'You Europe-returned chappies
forget certain things. Doctor Sahib, my daughter is a decent girl, it goes without saying. She does not flaunt
her body under the noses of strange men. You will understand that you cannot be permitted to see her, no,
not in any circumstances; accordingly I have required her to be positioned behind that sheet. She stands
there, like a good girl.'
A frantic note had crept into Doctor Aziz's voice. 'Ghani Sahib, tell me how I am to examine her
without looking at her?' Ghani smiled on.
'You will kindly specify which portion of my daughter it is necessary to inspect. I will then issue her
with my instructions to place the required segment against that hole which you see there. And so, in this
fashion the thing may be achieved.'
'But what, in any event, does the lady complain of?'-my grandfather, despairingly. To which Mr
Ghani, his eyes rising upwards in their sockets, his smile twisting into a grimace of grief, replied: 'The poor
child! She has a terrible, a too dreadful stomachache.'
'In that case,' Doctor Aziz said with some restraint, 'will she show me her stomach, please.'

Padma-our plump Padma-is sulking magnificently. (She can't read and, like all fish-lovers, dislikes
other people knowing anything she doesn't. Padma: strong, jolly, a consolation for my last days. But
definitely a bitch-in-the-manger.) She attempts to cajole me from my desk: 'Eat, na, food is spoiling.' I
remain stubbornly hunched over paper. 'But what is so precious,' Padma demands, her right hand slicing the
air updownup in exasperation, 'to need all this writing-shiting?' I reply: now that I've let out the details of my
birth, now that the perforated sheet stands between doctor and patient, there's no going back. Padma snorts.
Wrist smacks against forehead. 'Okay, starve starve, who cares two pice?' Another louder, conclusive
snort… but I take no exception to her attitude. She stirs a bubbling vat all day for a living; something hot
and vinegary has steamed her up tonight. Thick of waist, somewhat hairy of forearm, she flounces,
gesticulates, exits. Poor Padma. Things are always getting her goat. Perhaps even her name: understandably
enough, since her mother told her, when she was only small, that she had been named after the lotus
goddess, whose most common appellation amongst village folk is 'The One Who Possesses Dung'.
In the renewed silence, I return to sheets of paper which smell just a little of turmeric, ready and
willing to put out of its misery a narrative which I left yesterday hanging in mid-air-just as Scheherazade,
depending for her very survival on leaving Prince Shahryar eaten up by curiosity, used to do night after
night! I'll begin at once: by revealing that my grandfather's premonitions in the corridor were not without
foundation. In the succeeding months and years, he fell under what I can only describe as the sorcerer's spell
of that enormous-and as yet unstained-perforated cloth.
'Again?' Aadam's mother said, rolling her eyes. 'I tell you, my child, that girl is so sickly from too
much soft living only. Too much sweetmeats and spoiling, because of the absence of a mother's firm hand.
But go, take care of your invisible patient, your mother is all right with her little nothing of a headache.'
In those years, you see, the landowner's daughter Naseem Ghani contracted a quite extraordinary
number of minor illnesses, and each time a shikara wallah was despatched to summon the tall young Doctor
sahib with the big nose who was making such a reputation for himself in the valley. Aadam Aziz's visits to
the bedroom with the shaft of sunlight and the three lady wrestlers became weekly events; and on each
occasion he was vouchsafed a glimpse, through the mutilated sheet, of a different seven-inch circle of the
young woman's body. Her initial stomach-ache was succeeded by a very slightly twisted right ankle, an
ingrowing toenail on the big toe of the left foot, a tiny cut on the lower left calf. Tetanus is'a killer, Doctor
Sahib,' the landowner said, 'My Naseem must not die for a scratch.') There was the matter of her stiff right
knee, which the Doctor was obliged to manipulate through the hole in the sheet… and after a time the
illnesses leapt upwards, avoiding certain unmentionable zones, and began to proliferate around her upper
half. She suffered from something mysterious which her father called Finger Rot, which made the skin flake
off her hands; from weakness of the wrist-bones, for which Aadam prescribed calcium tablets; and from
attacks of constipation, for which he gave her a course of laxatives, since there was no question of being
permitted to administer an enema. She had fevers and she also had subnormal temperatures. At these times
his thermometer would be placed under her armpit and he would hum and haw about the relative
inefficiency of the method. In the opposite armpit she once developed a slight case of tineachloris and he
dusted her with yellow powder; after this treatment-which required him to rub the powder in, gently but
firmly, although the soft secret body began to shake and quiver and he heard helpless laughter coming
through the sheet, because Naseem Ghani was very ticklish-the itching went away, but Naseem soon I found
a new set of complaints. She waxed anaemic in the summer and bronchial in the winter. ('Her tubes are most
delicate,' Ghani explained, 'like little flutes.') Far away the Great War moved from crisis to crisis, while in
the cobwebbed house Doctor Aziz was also engaged in a total war against his sectioned patient's
inexhaustible complaints. And, in all those war years, Naseem never repeated an illness. 'Which only shows,'
Ghani told Mm, 'that you are a good doctor. When you cure, she is cured for good. But alas!'-he struck his
forehead-'She pines for her late mother, poor baby, and her body suffers. She is a too loving child.'
So gradually Doctor Aziz came to have a picture of Naseem in his mind, a badly-fitting collage of her
severally-inspected parts. This phantasm of a partitioned woman began to haunt him, and not only in his
dreams. Glued together by his imagination, she accompanied him on all his rounds, she moved into the front
room of his mind, so that waking and sleeping he could feel in his fingertips the softness of her ticklish skin
or the perfect tiny wrists or the beauty of the ankles; he could smell her scent of lavender and chambeli; he
could hear her voice and her helpless laughter of a little girl; but she was headless, because he had never
seen her face.
His mother by on her bed, spreadeagled on her stomach. 'Come, come and press me,' she said, 'my
doctor son whose fingers can soothe his old mother's muscles. Press, press, my child with his expression of a
constipated goose.' He kneaded her shoulders. She grunted, twitched, relaxed. 'Lower now,' she said, 'now
higher. To the right. Good. My brilliant son who cannot see what that Ghani landowner is doing. So clever,
my child, but he doesn't guess why that girl is forever ill with her piffling disorders. Listen, my boy: see the
nose on your face for once: that Ghani thinks you are a good catch for her. Foreign-educated and all. I have
worked in shops and been undressed by the eyes of strangers so that you should marry that Naseem! Of
course I am right; otherwise why would he look twice at our family?' Aziz pressed his mother. 'O God, stop
now, no need to kill me because I tell you the truth!'
By 1918, Aadam Aziz had come to live for his regular trips across the lake. And now his eagerness
became even more intense, because it became clear that, after three years, the landowner and his daughter
had become willing to lower certain barriers. Now, for the first time, Ghani said, 'A lump in the right chest.
Is it worrying, Doctor? Look. Look well.' And there, framed in the hole, was a perfectly-formed and
lyrically lovely… 'I must touch it,' Aziz said, fighting with his voice. Ghani slapped him on the back.
'Touch, touch!' he cried, 'The hands of the healer! The curing touch, eh, Doctor?' And Aziz reached out a
hand… 'Forgive me for asking; but is it the lady's time of the month?'… Little secret smiles appearing on the
faces of the lady wrestlers. Ghani, nodding affably: 'Yes. Don't be so embarrassed, old chap. We are family
and doctor now.' And Aziz, 'Then don't worry. The lumps will go when the time ends.'… And the next time,
'A pulled muscle in the back of her thigh, Doctor Sahib. Such pain!' And there, in the sheet, weakening the
eyes of Aadam Aziz, hung a superbly rounded and impossible buttock… And now Aziz: 'Is it permitted
that…' 'Whereupon a word from Ghani; an obedient reply from behind the sheet; a drawstring pulled; and
pajamas fall from the celestial rump, which swells wondrously through the hole. Aadam Aziz forces himself
into a medical frame of mind… reaches out… feels. And swears to himself, in amazement, that he sees the
bottom reddening in a shy, but compliant blush.
That evening, Aadam contemplated the blush. Did the magic of the sheet work on both sides of the
hole? Excitedly, he envisaged his headless Naseem tingling beneath the scrutiny of his eyes, his
thermometer, his stethoscope, his fingers, and trying to build a picture in her mind of him. She was at a
disadvantage, of course, having seen nothing but his hands… Aadam began to hope with an illicit
desperation for Naseem Ghani to develop a migraine or graze her unseen chin, so they could look each other
in the face. He knew how unprofessional his feelings were; but did nothing to stifle them. There was not
much he could do. They had acquired a life of their own. In short: my grandfather had fallen in love, and had
come to think of the perforated sheet as something sacred and magical, because through it he had seen the
things which had filled up the hole inside him which had been created when he had been hit on the nose by a
tussock and insulted by the boatman Tai.
On the day the World War ended, Naseem developed the longed-for headache. Such historical
coincidences have littered, and pejrhaps befouled, my family's existence in the world.
He hardly dared to look at what was framed in the hole in the sheet. Maybe she was hideous; perhaps
that explained all this performance… he looked. And saw a soft face that was not at all ugly, a cushioned
setting for her glittering, gemstone eyes, which were brown with flecks of gold: tiger's-eyes. Doctor Aziz's
fall was complete. And Naseem burst out, 'But Doctor, my God, what a nose? Ghani, angrily, 'Daughter,
mind your…' But patient and doctor were laughing together, and Aziz was saying, 'Yes, yes, it is a
remarkable specimen. They tell me there are dynasties waiting in it…' And he bit his tongue because he had
been about to add, '… like snot.'
And Ghani, who had stood blindly beside the sheet for three long years, smiling and smiling and
smiling, began once again to smile his secret smile, which was mirrored in the lips of the wrestlers.
Meanwhile, the boatman, Tai, had taken his unexplained decision to give up washing. In a valley
drenched in freshwater lakes, where even the very poorest people could (and did) pride themselves on their
cleanliness, Tai chose to stink. For three years now, he had neither bathed nor washed himself after
answering calls of nature. He wore the same clothes, unwashed, year in, year out; his one concession to
winter was to put his chugha-coat over his putrescent pajamas. The little basket of hot coals which he carried
inside the chugha, in the Kashmiri fashion, to keep him warm in the bitter cold, only animated and
accentuated his evil odours. He took to drifting slowly past the Aziz household, releasing the dreadful fumes
of his body across the small garden and into the house. Flowers died; birds fled from the ledge outside old
Father Aziz's window. Naturally, Tai lost work; the English in particular were reluctant to be ferried by a
human cesspit. The story went around the lake that Tai's wife, driven to distraction by the old man's sudden
filthiness, pleaded for a reason. He had answered: 'Ask our foreign-returned doctor, ask that nakkoo, that
German Aziz,' Was it, then, an attempt to offend the Doctor's hypersensitive nostrils (in which the itch of
danger had subsided somewhat under the anaesthetizing ministrations of love)? Or a gesture of
unchangingness in defiance of the invasion of the doctori-attache from Heidelberg? Once Aziz asked the
ancient, straight out, what it was all for; but Tai only breathed on him and rowed away. The breath nearly
felled Aziz; it was sharp as an axe.
In 1918, Doctor Aziz's father, deprived of his birds, died in his sleep; and at once his mother, who had
been able to sell the gemstone business thanks to the success of Aziz's practice, and who now saw her
husband's death as a merciful release for her from a life filled with responsibilities, took to her own deathbed
and followed her man before the end of his own forty-day mourning period. By the time the Indian
regiments returned at the end of the war, Doctor Aziz was an orphan, and a free man-except that his heart
had fallen through a hole some seven inches across.
Desolating effect of Tai's behaviour: it ruined Doctor Aziz's good relations with the lake's floating
population. He, who as a child had chatted freely with fishwives and flower-sellers, found himself looked at
askance. 'Ask that nakkoo, that German Aziz.' Tai had branded him as an alien, and therefore a person not
completely to be trusted. They didn't like the boatman, but they found the transformation which the Doctor
had evidently worked upon him even more disturbing. Aziz found himself suspected, even ostracized, by the
poor; and it hurt him badly. Now he understood what Tai was up to: the man was trying to chase him out of
the valley.
The story of the perforated sheet got out, too. The lady wrestlers were evidently less discreet than they
looked. Aziz began to notice people pointing at him. Women giggled behind their palms…
'I've decided to give Tai his victory,' he said. The three lady wrestlers, two holding up the sheet, the
third hovering near the door, strained to hear him through the cotton wool in their ears. ('I made my father
do it,' Naseem told him, 'These chatterjees won't do any more of their tittling and tattling from now on.')
Naseem's eyes, hole-framed, became wider than ever.
.. .Just like his own when, a few days earlier, he had been walking the city streets, had seen the last bus
of the winter arrive, painted with its colourful inscriptions-on the front, god willing in green shadowed in
red; on the back, blue-shadowed yellow crying thank god!, and in cheeky maroon, sorry-bye-bye!-and had
recognized, through a web of new rings and lines on her face, Ike Lubin as she descended…
Nowadays, Ghani the landowner left him alone with earplugged guardians, To talk a little; the
doctor-patient relationship can only deepen in strictest confidentiality. I see that now, Aziz Sahib-forgive my
earlier intrusions.' Nowadays, Naseem's tongue was getting freer all the time. 'What kind of talk is this?
What are you-a man or a mouse? To leave home because of a stinky shikara-man!'…
'Oskar died,' Ilse told him, sipping fresh lime water on his mother's takht. 'Like a comedian. He went
to talk to the army and tell them not to be pawns. The fool really thought the troops would fling down their
guns and walk away. We watched from a window and I prayed they wouldn't just trample all over him. The
regiment had learned to march in step by then, you wouldn't recognize them. As he reached the streetcorner
across from the parade ground he tripped over his own shoelace and fell into the street. A staff car hit him
and he died. He could never keep his laces tied, that ninny'… here there were diamonds freezing in her
lashes… 'He was the type that gives anarchists a bad name.'
'All right,' Naseem conceded, 'so you've got a good chance of landing a good job. Agra University, it's
a famous place, don't think I don't know. University doctor!… sounds good. Say you're going for that, and
it's a different business.' Eyelashes drooped in the hole. 'I will miss you, naturally…'
'I'm in love,' Aadam Aziz said to Ilse Lubin. And later,'… So I've only seen her through a hole in a
sheet, one part at a time; and I swear her bottom blushes.'
'They must be putting something in the air up here,' Use said.
'Naseem, I've got the job,' Aadam said excitedly. 'The letter came today. With effect from April 1919.
Your father says he can find a buyer for my house and the gemstone shop also.'
'Wonderful,' Naseem pouted. 'So now I must find a new doctor. Or maybe I'll get that old hag again
who didn't know two things about anything.'
'Because I am an orphan,' Doctor Aziz said, 'I must come myself in place of my family members. But I
have come nevertheless, Ghani Sahib, for the first time without being sent for. This is not a professional
visit.'
'Dear boy!' Ghani, clapping Aadam on the back. 'Of course you must marry her. With an A-1 fine
dowry! No expense spared! It will be the wedding of the year, oh most certainly, yes!'
'I cannot leave you behind when I go,' Aziz said to Naseem. Ghani said, 'Enough of this tamasha! No
more need for this sheet tomfoolery! Drop it down, you women, these are young lovers now!'
'At last,' said Aadam Aziz, 'I see you whole at last. But I must go now. My rounds… and an old friend
is staying with me, I must tell her, she will be very happy for us both. A dear friend from Germany.'
'No, Aadam baba,' his bearer said, 'since the morning I have not seen Ilse Begum. She hired that old
Tai to go for a shikara ride.'
'What can be said, sir?' Tai mumbled meekly. 'I am honoured indeed to be summoned into the home of
a so-great personage as yourself. Sir, the lady hired me for a trip to the Mughal Gardens, to do it before the
lake freezes. A quiet lady, Doctor Sahib, not one word out of her all the time. So I was thinking my own
unworthy private thoughts as old fools will and suddenly when I look she is not in her seat. Sahib, on my
wife's head I swear it, it is not possible to see over the back of the seat, how was I to tell? Believe a poor old
boatman who was your friend when you were young…'
'Aadam baba,' the old bearer interrupted, 'excuse me but just now I have found this paper on her table.'
'I know where she is,' Doctor Aziz stared at Tai. 'I don't know how you keep getting mixed up in my
life; but you showed me the place once. You said: certain foreign women come here to drown.'
'I, Sahib?' Tai shocked, malodorous, innocent. 'But grief is making your head play trick! How can I
know these things?'
And after the body, bloated, wrapped in weeds, had been dredged up by a group of blank-faced
boatmen, Tai visited the shikara halt and told the men there, as they recoiled from his breath of a bullock
with dysentery, 'He blames me, only imagine! Brings his loose Europeans here and tells me it is my fault
when they jump into the lake!… I ask, how did he know just where to look? Yes, ask him that, ask that
nakkoo Aziz!'
She had left a note. It read: 'I didn't mean it.'
I make no comment; these events, which have tumbled from my lips any old how, garbled by haste
and emotion, are for others to judge. Let me be direct now, and say that during the long, hard winter of
1918-19, Tai fell ill, contracting a violent skin disease, akin to that European curse called the King's Evil;
but he refused to see Doctor Aziz, and was treated by a local homeopath. And in March, when the lake
thawed, a marriage took place in a large marquee in the grounds of Ghani the landowner's house. The
wedding contract assured Aadam Aziz of a respectable sum of money, which would help buy a house in
Agra, and the dowry included, at Doctor Aziz's especial request, a certain mutilated bedsheet. The young
couple sat on a dais, garlanded and cold, while the guests filed past dropping rupees into their laps. That
night my grandfather placed the perforated sheet beneath his bride and himself and in the morning it was
adorned by three drops of blood, which formed a small triangle. In the morning, the sheet was displayed, and
after the consummation ceremony a limousine hired by the landowner arrived to drive my grandparents to
Amritsar, where they would catch the Frontier Mail. Mountains crowded round and stared as my grandfather
left his home for the last time. (He would return, once, but not to leave.) Aziz thought he saw an ancient
boatman standing on land to watch them pass-but it was probably a mistake, since Tai was ill. The blister of
a temple atop Sankara Acharya, which Muslims had taken to calling the Takht-e-Sulaiman, or Seat of
Solomon, paid them no attention. Winter-bare poplars and snow-covered fields of saffron undulated around
them as the car drove south, with an old leather bag containing, amongst other things, a stethoscope and a
bedsheet, packed in the boot. Doctor Aziz felt, in the pit of his stomach, a sensation akin to weightlessness.
Or falling.
(… And now I am cast as a ghost. I am nine years old and the whole family, my father, my mother, the
Brass Monkey and myself, are staying at my grandparents' house in Agra, and the grandchildren-myself
among them-are staging the customary New Year's play; and I have been cast as a ghost. Accordingly-and
surreptitiously so as to preserve the secrets of the forthcoming theatricals-I am ransacking the house for a
spectral disguise. My grandfather is out and about his rounds. I am in his room. And here on top of this
cupboard is an old trunk, covered in dust and spiders, but unlocked. And here, inside it, is the answer to my
prayers. Not just a sheet, but one with a hole already cut in it! Here it is, inside this leather bag inside this
trunk, right beneath an old stethoscope and a tube of mildewed Vick's Inhaler… the sheet's appearance in
our show was nothing less than a sensation. My grandfather took one look at it and rose roaring to his feet.
He strode up on stage and unghosted me right in front of everyone. My grandmother's lips were so tightly
pursed they seemed to disappear. Between them, the one booming at me in the voice of a forgotten boatman,
the other conveying her fury through vanished lips, they reduced the awesome ghost to a weeping wreck. I
fled, took to my heels and ran into the little cornfield, not knowing what had happened. I sat there-perhaps
on the very spot on which Nadir Khan had sat!-for several hours, swearing over and over that I would never
again open a forbidden trunk, and feeling vaguely resentful that it had not been locked in the first place. But
I knew, from their rage, that the sheet was somehow very important indeed.)
I have been interrupted by Padma, who brought me my dinner and then withheld it, blackmailing me:
'So if you're going to spend all your time wrecking your eyes with that scribbling, at least you must read it to
me.' I have been singing for my supper-but perhaps our Padma will be useful, because it's impossible to stop
her being a critic. She is particularly angry with my remarks about her name. 'What do you know, city boy?'
she cried-hand slicing the air. 'In my village there is no shame in being named for the Dung Goddess. Write
at once that you are wrong, completely.' In accordance with my lotus's wishes, I insert, forthwith, a brief
paean to Dung.
Dung, that fertilizes and causes the crops to grow! Dung, which is patted into thin chapati-like cakes
when still fresh and moist, and is sold to the village builders, who use it to secure and strengthen the walls of
kachcha buildings made of mud! Dung, whose arrival from the nether end of cattle goes a long way towards
explaining their divine and sacred status! Oh, yes, I was wrong, I admit I was prejudiced, no doubt because
its unfortunate odours do have a way of offending my sensitive nose-how wonderful, how ineffably lovely it
must be to be named for the Purveyor of Dung!
… On April 6th, 1919, the holy city of Amritsar smelled (gloriously, Padma, celestially!) of
excrement. And perhaps the (beauteous!) reek did not offend the Nose on my grandfather's face-after all,
Kashmir! peasants used it, as described above, for a kind of plaster. Even in Srinagar, hawkers with barrows
of round dung-cakes were not an uncommon sight. But then the stuff was drying, muted, useful. Amritsar
dung was fresh and (worse) redundant. Nor was it all bovine. It issued from the rumps of the horses between
the shafts of the city's many tongas, ikkas and gharries; and mules and men and dogs attended nature's calls,
mingling in a brotherhood of shit. But there were cows, too: sacred kine roaming the dusty streets, each
patrolling its own territory, staking its claims in excrement. And flies! Public Enemy Number One, buzzing
gaily from turd to steaming turd, celebrated and cross-pollinated these freely-given offerings. The city
swarmed about, too, mirroring the motion of the flies. Doctor Aziz looked down from his hotel window on
to this scene as a Jain in a face-mask walked past, brushing the pavement before him with a twig-broom, to
avoid stepping on an ant, or even a fly. Spicy sweet fumes rose from a street-snack barrow. 'Hot pakoras,
pakoras hot!' A white woman was buying silks from a shop across the street and men in turbans were ogling
her. Naseem-now Naseem Aziz-had a sharp headache; it was the first time she'd ever repeated an illness, but
life outside her quiet valley had come as something of a shock to her. There was a jug of fresh lime water by
her bed, emptying rapidly. Aziz stood at the window, inhaling the city. The spire of the Golden Temple
gleamed in the sun. But his nose itched: something was not right here.
Close-up of my grandfather's right hand: nails knuckles fingers all somehow bigger than you'd expect.
Clumps of red hair on the outside edges. Thumb and forefinger pressed together, separated only by a
thickness of paper. In short: my grandfather was holding a pamphlet. It had been inserted into his hand (we
cut to a long-shot-nobody from Bombay should be without a basic film vocabulary) as he entered the hotel
foyer. Scurrying of urchin through revolving door, leaflets falling in his wake, as the chaprassi gives chase.
Mad revolutions in the doorway, roundandround; until chaprassi-hand demands a close-up, too, because it is
pressing thumb to forefinger, the two separated only by the thickness of urchin-ear. Ejection of juvenile
disseminator of gutter-tracts; but still my grandfather retained the message. Now, looking out of his window,
he sees it echoed on a wall opposite; and there, on the minaret of a mosque; and in the large black type of
newsprint under a hawker's arm. Leaflet newspaper mosque and wall are crying: Hartal! Which is to say,
literally speaking, a day of mourning, of stillness, of silence. But this is India in the heyday of the Mahatma,
when even language obeys the instructions of Gandhiji, and the word has acquired, under his influence, new
resonances. Hartal-April 7, agree mosque newspaper wall and pamphlet, because Gandhi has decreed that
the whole of India shall, on that day, come to a halt. To mourn, in peace, the continuing presence of the
British.
'I do not understand this hartal when nobody is dead,' Naseem is crying softly. 'Why will the train not
run? How long are we stuck for?'
Doctor Aziz notices a soldierly young man in the street, and thinks-the Indians have fought for the
British; so many of them have seen the world by now, and been tainted by Abroad. They will not easily go
back to the old world. The British are wrong to try and turn back the clock. 'It was a mistake to pass the
Rowlatt Act,' he murmurs.
'What rowlatt?' wails Naseem. 'This is nonsense where I'm concerned!'
'Against political agitation,' Aziz explains, and returns to his thoughts. Tai once said: 'Kashmiris are
different. Cowards, for instance. Put a gun in a Kashmiri's hand and it will have to go off by itself-he'll never
dare to pull the trigger. We are not like Indians, always making battles.' Aziz, with Tai in his head, does not
feel Indian. Kashmir, after all, is not strictly speaking a part of the Empire, but an independent princely state.
He is not sure if the hartal of pamphlet mosque wall newspaper is his fight, even though he is in occupied
territory now. He turns from the window…
… To see Naseem weeping into a pillow. She has been weeping ever since he asked her, on their
second night, to move a little. 'Move where?' she asked. 'Move how?' He became awkward and said, 'Only
move, I mean, like a woman…' She shrieked in horror. 'My God,what have I married? I know you
Europe-returned men. You find terrible women and then you try to make us girls be like them! Listen,
Doctor Sahib, husband or no husband, I am not any… bad word woman,' This was a battle my grandfather
never won; and it set the tone for their marriage, which rapidly developed into a place of frequent and
devastating warfare, under whose depredations the young girl behind the sheet and the gauche young Doctor
turned rapidly into different, stranger beings… 'What now, wife?' Aziz asks. Naseem buries her face in the
pillow. 'What else?' she says in muffled tones. 'You, or what? You want me to walk naked in front of strange
men.' (He has told her to come out of purdah.)
He says, 'Your shirt covers you from neck to wrist to knee. Your loose pajamas hide you down to and
including your ankles. What we have left are your feet and face. Wife, are your face and feet obscene?' But
she wails, 'They will see more than that! They will see my deep-deep shame!'
And now an accident, which launches us into the world of Mercurochrome… Aziz, finding his temper
slipping from him, drags all his wife's purdah-veils from her suitcase, flings them into a wastepaper basket
made of tin with a painting of Guru Nanak on the side, and sets fire to them. Flames leap up, taking him by
surprise, licking at curtains. Aadam rushes to the door and yells for help as the cheap curtains begin to
blaze… and bearers guests washerwomen stream into the room and flap at die burning fabric with dusters
towels and other people's laundry. Buckets are brought; the fire goes out; and Naseem cowers on the bed as
about thirty-five Sikhs, Hindus and untouchables throng in the smoke-filled room. Finally they leave, and
Naseem unleashes two sentences before clamping her lips obstinately shut.
'You are a mad man. I want more lime water.'
My grandfather opens the windows, turns to his bride. 'The smoke will take time to go; I will take a
walk. Are you coming?'
Lips clamped; eyes squeezed; a single violent No from the head; and my grandfather goes into the
streets alone. His parting shot: 'Forget about being a good Kashmiri girl. Start thinking about being a modern
Indian woman.'
… While in the Cantonment area, at British Army H.Q., one Brigadier R. E. Dyer is waxing his
moustache.
It is April 7th, 1919, and in Amritsar the Mahatma's grand design is being distorted. The shops have
shut; the railway station is closed; but now rioting mobs are breaking them up. Doctor Aziz, leather bag in
hand, is out in the streets, giving help wherever possible. Trampled bodies have been left where they fell. He
is bandaging wounds, daubing them liberally with Schrome, which makes them look bloodier than
ever, but at least disinfects them. Finally he returns to his hotel room, his clothes soaked in red stains, and
Naseem commences a panic. 'Let me help, let me help, Allah what a man I've married, who goes into gullies
to fight with goondas!' She is all over him with water on wads of cotton wool. 'I don't know why can't you
be a respectable doctor like ordinary people are just cure important illnesses and all?  God you've got
blood everywhere! Sit, sit now, let me wash you at least!'
'It isn't blood, wife.'
'You think I can't see for myself with my own eyes? Why must you make a fool of me even when
you're hurt? Must your wife not look after you, even?'
'It's Mercurochrome, Naseem. Red medicine.'
Naseem-who had become a whirlwind of activity, seizing clothes, running taps-freezes. 'You do it on
purpose,' she says, 'to make me look stupid. I am not stupid. I have read several books.'
It is April 13th, and they are still in Amritsar. 'This affair isn't finished,' Aadam Aziz told Naseem. 'We
can't go, you see: they may need doctors again.'
'So we must sit here and wait until the end of the world?'
He rubbed his nose. 'No, not so long, I am afraid.'
That afternoon, the streets are suddenly full of people, all moving in the same direction, defying Dyer's
new Martial Law regulations. Aadam tells Naseem, 'There must be a meeting planned-there will be trouble
from the military. They have banned meetings.'
'Why do you have to go? Why not wait to be called?'
… A compound can be anything from a wasteland to a park. The largest compound in Amritsar is
called Jallianwala Bagh. It is not grassy. Stones cans glass and other things are everywhere. To get into it,
you must walk down a very narrow alleyway between two buildings. On April 13th, many thousands of
Indians are crowding through this alleyway. 'It is peaceful protest,' someone tells Doctor Aziz. Swept along
by the crowds, he arrives at the mouth of the alley. A bag from Heidelberg is in his right hand. (No close-up
is necessary.) He is, I know, feeling very scared, because his nose is itching worse than it ever has; but he is
a trained doctor, he puts it out of his mind, he enters the compound. Somebody is making a passionate
speech. Hawkers move through the crowd selling channa and sweetmeats. The air is filled with dust. There
do not seem to be any goondas, any trouble– makers, as far as my grandfather can see. A group of Sikhs has
spread a cloth on the ground and is eating, seated around it. There is still a smell of ordure in the air. Aziz
penetrates the heart of the crowd, as Brigadier R. . Dyer arrives at the entrance to the alleyway, followed
by fifty crack troops. He is the Martial Law Commander of Amritsar-an important man, after all; the waxed
tips of his moustache are rigid with importance. As the fifty-one men march down the alleyway a tickle
replaces the itch in my grandfather's nose. The fifty-one men enter the compound and take up positions,
twenty-five to Dyer's right and twenty-five to his left; and Aadam Aziz ceases to concentrate on the events
around him as the tickle mounts to unbearable intensities. As Brigadier Dyer issues a command the sneeze
hits my grandfather full in the face. 'Yaaaakh-th!' he sneezes and falls forward, losing his balance,
following his nose and thereby saving his life. His 'doctori-attache' flies open; bottles, liniment and syringes
scatter in the dust. He is scrabbling furiously at people's feet, trying to save his equipment before it is
crushed. There is a noise like teeth chattering in winter and someone falls on him. Red stuffstains his shirt.
There are screams now and sobs and the strange chattering continues. More and more people seem to have
stumbled and fallen on top of my grandfather. He becomes afraid for his back. The clasp of his bag is
digging into his chest, inflicting upon it a bruise so severe and mysterious that it will not fade until after his
death, years later, on the hill of Sankara Acharya or Takht-e-Sulaiman. His nose is jammed against a bottle
of red pills. The chattering stops and is replaced by the noises of people and birds. There seems to be no
traffic noise whatsoever. Brigadier Dyer's fifty men put down their machine-guns and go away. They have
fired a total of one thousand six hundred and fifty rounds into the unarmed crowd. Of these, one thousand
five hundred and sixteen have found their mark, killing or wounding some person. 'Good shooting,' Dyer
tells his men, 'We have done a jolly good thing.'
When my grandfather got home that night, my grandmother was trying hard to be a modern woman, to
please him, and so she did not turn a hair at his appearance. 'I see you've been spilling the Mercurochrome
again, clumsy,' she said, appeasingly.
'It's blood,' he replied, and she fainted. When he brought her round with the help of a little sal volatile,
she said, 'Are you hurt?'
'No,' he said.
'But where have you been, my God?'
'Nowhere on earth,' he said, and began to shake in her arms.
My own hand, I confess, has begun to wobble; not entirely because of its theme, but because I have
noticed a thin crack, like a hair, appearing in my wrist, beneath the skin… No matter. We all owe death a
life. So let me conclude with the uncorroborated rumour that the boatman Tai, who recovered from his
scrofulous infection soon after my grandfather left Kashmir, did not die until 1947, when (the story goes) he
was infuriated by India and Pakistan's struggle over his valley, and walked to Chhamb with the express
purpose of standing between the opposing forces and giving them a piece of his mind. Kashmiri for the
Kashmiris: that was his line. Naturally, they shot him. Oskar Lubin would probably have approved of his
rhetorical gesture; R. E. Dyer might have commended his murderers' rifle skills. I must go to bed. Padma is
waiting; and I need a little warmth.
Hit-the-spittoon
Please believe that I am falling apart.
I am not speaking metaphorically; nor is this the opening gambit of some melodramatic, riddling,
grubby appeal for pity. I mean quite simply that I have begun to crack all over like an old jug-that my poor
body, singular, unlovely, buffeted by too much history, subjected to drainage above and drainage below,
mutilated by doors, brained by spittoons, has started coming apart at the seams. In short, I am literally
disintegrating, slowly for the moment, although there are signs of acceleration. I ask you only to accept (as I
have accepted) that I shall eventually crumble into (approximately) six hundred and thirty million particles
of anonymous, and necessarily oblivious dust. This is why I have resolved to confide in paper, before I
forget. (We are a nation of forgetters.)
There are moments of terror, but they go away. Panic like a bubbling sea-beast conies up for air, boils
on the surface, but eventually returns to the deep. It is important for me to remain calm. I chew betel-nut and
expectorate in the direction of a cheap brassy bowl, playing the ancient game of hit-the-spittoon: Nadir
Khan's game, which he learned from the old men in Agra… and these days you can buy 'rocket paans' in
which, as well as the gum-reddening paste of the betel, the comfort of cocaine lies folded in a leaf. But that
would be cheating.
… Rising from my pages comes the unmistakable whiff of chutney. So let me obfuscate no further: I,
Saleem Sinai, possessor of the most delicately-gifted olfactory organ in history, have dedicated my latter
days to the large-scale preparation of condiments. But now, 'A cook?' you gasp in horror, 'A khansama
merely? How is it possible?' And, I grant, such mastery of the multiple gifts of cookery and language is rare
indeed; yet I possess it. You are amazed; but then I am not, you see, one of your 200-rupees-a-month
cookery johnnies, but my own master, working beneath the saffron and green winking of my personal neon
goddess. And my chutneys and kasaundies are, after all, connected to my nocturnal scribblings-by day
amongst the pickle-vats, by night within these sheets, I spend my time at the great work of preserving.
Memory, as well as fruit, is being saved from the corruption of the clocks.
But here is Padma at my elbow, bullying me back into the world of linear narrative, the universe of
what-happened-next: 'At this rate,' Padma complains, 'you'll be two hundred years old before you manage to
tell about your birth.' She is affecting nonchalance, jutting a careless hip in my general direction, but doesn't
fool me. I know now that she is, despite all her protestations, hooked. No doubt about it: my story has her by
the throat, so that all at once she's stopped nagging me to go home, to take more baths, to change my
vinegar-stained clothes, to abandon even for a moment this darkling pickle-factory where the smells of
spices are forever frothing in the air… now my dung goddess simply makes up a cot in the corner of this
office and prepares my food on two blackened gas-rings, only interrupting my Anglepoise-lit writing to
expostulate, 'You better get a move on or you'll die before you get yourself born.' Fighting down the proper
pride of the successful storyteller, I attempt to educate her. 'Things-even people-have a way of leaking into
each other,' I explain, 'like flavours when you cook. Ilse Lubin's suicide, for example, leaked into old Aadam
and sat there in a puddle until he saw God. Likewise,' I intone earnestly, 'the past has dripped into me .'.. so
we can't ignore it…' Her shrug, which does pleasantly wavy things to her chest, cuts me off. 'To me it's a
crazy way of telling your life story,' she cries, 'if you can't even get to where your father met your mother.'
… And certainly Padma is leaking into me. As history pours out of my fissured body, my lotus is
quietly dripping in, with her down-to-earthery, and her paradoxical superstition, her contradictory love of
the fabulous-so it's appropriate that I'm about to tell the story of the death of Mian Abdullah. The doomed
Hummingbird: a legend of our times.
… And Padma is a generous woman, because she stays by me in these last days, although I can't do
much for her. That's right-and once again, it's a fitting thing to mention before I launch into the tale of Nadir
Khan-I am unmanned. Despite Padma's many and varied gifts and ministrations, I can't leak into her, not
even when she puts her left foot on my right, winds her right leg around my waist, inclines her head up
toward mine and makes cooing noises; not even when she whispers in my ear, 'So now that the writery is
done, let's see if we can make your other pencil work!'; despite everything she tries, I cannot hit her spittoon.
Enough confessions. Bowing to the ineluctable Padma-pressures of what-happened-nextism, and
remembering the finite quantity of time at my disposal, I leap forwards from Mercurochrome and land in
1942. (I'm keen to get my parents together, too.)
It seems that in the late summer of that year my grandfather, Doctor Aadam Aziz, contracted a highly
dangerous form of optimism. Bicycling around Agra, he whistled piercingly, badly, but very happily. He
was by no means alone, because, despite strenuous efforts by the authorities to stamp it out, this virulent
disease had been breaking out all over India that year, and drastic steps were to be taken before it was
brought under control. The old men at the paan-shop at the top of Cornwallis Road chewed betel and
suspected a trick. 'I have lived twice as long as I should have,' the oldest one said, his voice crackling like an
old radio because decades were rubbing up against each other around his vocal chords, 'and I've never seen
so many people so cheerful in such a bad time. It is the devil's work.' It was, indeed, a resilient virus-the
weather alone should have discouraged such germs from breeding, since it had become clear that the rains
had failed. The earth was cracking. Dust ate the edges of roads, and on some days huge gaping fissures
appeared in the midst of macadamed intersections. The betel-chewers at the paan-shop had begun to talk
about omens; calming themselves with their game of hit-the-spittoon, they speculated upon the numberless
nameless Godknowswhats that might now issue from the Assuring earth. Apparently a Sikh from the
bicycle-repair shop had had his turban pushed off his head in the heat of one afternoon, when his hair,
without any reason, had suddenly stood on end. And, more prosaically, the water shortage had reached the
point where milkmen could no longer find clean water with which to adulterate the milk :.. Far away, there
was a World War in progress once again. In Agra, the heat mounted. But still my grandfather whistled. The
old men at the paan-shop found Ms whistling in rather poor taste, given the circumstances.
(And I, like them, expectorate and rise above fissures.)
Astride his bicycle, leather attache attached to carrier, my grandfather wMstled. Despite irritations of
the nose, his lips pursed. Despite a bruise on his chest which had refused to fade for twenty-three years, his
good humour was unimpaired. Air passed his lips and was transmuted into sound. He whistled an old
German tune: Tannenbaum.
The optimism epidemic had been caused by one single human being, whose name, Mian Abdullah,
was only used by newspapermen. To everyone else, he was the Hummingbird, a creature which would be
impossible if it did not exist. 'Magician turned conjurer,' the newspapermen wrote, 'Mian Abdullah rose from
the famous magicians' ghetto in Delhi to become the hope of India's hundred million Muslims.' The
Hummingbird was the founder, chairman, unifier and moving spirit of the Free Islam Convocation; and in
1942, marquees and rostrums were being erected on the Agra maidan, where the Convocation's second
annual assembly was about to take place. My grandfather, fifty-two years old, his hair turned white by the
years and other afflictions, had begun whistling as he passed the maidan. Now he leaned round corners on
his bicycle, taking them at a jaunty angle, threading his way between cowpats and children… and, in another
time and place, told Ms friend the Rani of Cooch Naheen: 'I started off as a Kashmiri and not much of a
Muslim. Then I got a bruise on the chest that turned me into an Indian. I'm still not much of a Muslim, but
I'm all for Abdullah. He's fighting my fight.' His eyes were still the blue of Kashmiri sky… he arrived home,
and although Ms eyes retained a glimmer of contentment, the whistling stopped; because waiting for him in
the courtyard filled with malevolent geese were the disapproving features of my grandmama, Naseem Aziz,
whom he had made the mistake of loving in fragments, and who was now unified and transmuted into the
formidable figure she would always remain, and who was always known by the curious title of Reverend
Mother.
She had become a prematurely old, wide woman, with two enormous moles like witch's nipples on her
face; and she lived within an invisible fortress of her own making, an ironclad citadel of traditions and
certainties. Earlier that year Aadam Aziz had commissioned life-size blow-up photographs of his family to
hang on the living-room wall; the three girls and two boys had posed dutifully enough, but Reverend Mother
had rebelled when her turn came. Eventually, the photographer had tried to catch her unawares, but she
seized Ms camera and broke it over his skull. Fortunately, he lived; but there are no photographs of my
grandmother anywhere on the earth. She was not one to be trapped in anyone's little black box. It was
enough for her that she must live in unveiled, barefaced shamelessness-there was no question of allowing
the fact to be recorded.
It was perhaps the obligation of facial nudity, coupled with Aziz's constant requests for her to move
beneath Mm, that had driven her to the barricades; and the domestic rules she established were a system of
self-defence so impregnable that Aziz, after many fruitless attempts, had more or less given up trying to
storm her many ravelins and bastions, leaving her, like a large smug spider, to rule her chosen domain.
(Perhaps, too, it wasn't a system of self-defence at all, but a means of defence against her self.)
Among the things to which she denied entry were all political matters. When Doctor Aziz wished to
talk about such things, he visited his friend the Rani, and Reverend Mother sulked; but not very hard,
because she knew Ms visits represented a victory for her.
The twin hearts of her kingdom were her kitchen and her pantry. I never entered the former, but
remembered staring through the pantry's locked screen-doors at the enigmatic world within, a world of
hanging wire baskets covered with linen cloths to keep out the flies, of tins wMch I knew to be full of gur
and other sweets, of locked chests with neat square labels, of nuts and turnips and sacks of grain, of
goose-eggs and wooden brooms. Pantry and kitchen were her inalienable territory; and she defended them
ferociously. When she was carrying her last child, my aunt Emerald, her husband offered to relieve her of
the chore of supervising the cook. She did not reply; but the next day, when Aziz approached the kitchen,
she emerged from it with a metal pot in her hands and barred the doorway. She was fat and also pregnant, so
there was not much room left in the doorway. Aadam Aziz frowned. 'What is this, wife?' To which my
grandmother answered, 'This, whatsitsname, is a very heavy pot; and if just once I catch you in here,
whatsitsname, I'll push your head into it, add some dahi, and make, whatsitsname, a korma.' I don't know
how my grandmother came to adopt the term whatsitsname as her leitmotif, but as the years passed it
invaded her sentences more and more often. I like to think of it as an unconscious cry for help… as a
seriously-meant question. Reverend Mother was giving us a hint that, for all her presence and bulk, she was
adrift in the universe. She didn't know, you see, what it was called.
… And at the dinner-table, imperiously, she continued to rule. No food was set upon the table, no
plates were laid. Curry and crockery were marshalled upon a low side-table by her right hand, and Aziz and
the cMldren ate what she dished out. It is a sign of the power of this custom that, even when her husband
was afflicted by constipation, she never once permitted Mm to choose Ms food, and listened to no requests
or words of advice. A fortress may not move. Not even when its dependants' movements become irregular.
During the long concealment of Nadir Khan, during the visits to the house on Cornwallis Road of
young Zulfikar who fell in love with Emerald and of the prosperous reccine-and-leathercloth merchant
named Ahmed Sinai who hurt my aunt Alia so badly that she bore a grudge for twenty-five years before
discharging it cruelly upon my mother, Reverend Mother's iron grip upon her household never faltered; and
even before Nadir's arrival precipitated the great silence, Aadam Aziz had tried to break this grip, and been
obliged to go to war with his wife. (All this helps to show how remarkable his affliction by optimism
actually was.)
… In 1932, ten years earlier, he had taken control of his children's education. Reverend Mother was
dismayed; but it was a father's traditional role, so she could not object. Alia was eleven; the second daughter,
Mumtaz, was almost nine. The two boys, Hanif and Mustapha, were eight and six, and young Emerald was
not yet five. Reverend Mother took to confiding her fears to the family cook, Daoud. 'He fills their heads
with I don't know what foreign languages, whatsitsname, and other rubbish also, no doubt.' Daoud stirred
pots and Reverend Mother cried, 'Do you wonder, whatsitsname, that the little one calls herself Emerald? In
English, whatsitsname? That man will ruin my children for me. Put less cumin in that, whatsitsname, you
should pay more attention to your cooking and less to minding other people's business.'
She made only one educational stipulation: religious instruction. Unlike Aziz, who was racked by
ambiguity, she had remained devout. 'You have your Hummingbird,' she told him, 'but I, whatsitsname, have
the Call of God. A better noise, whatsitsname, than that man's hum.' It was one of her rare political
comments… and then the day arrived when Aziz Arew out the religious tutor. Thumb and forefinger closed
around the maulvi's ear. Naseem Aziz saw her husband leading the stragglebearded wretch to the door in the
garden wall; gasped; then cried out as her husband's foot was applied to the divine's fleshy parts. Unleashing
thunderbolts, Reverend Mother sailed into battle.
'Man without dignity!' she cursed her husband, and, 'Man without, whatsitsname, shame!' Children
watched from the safety of the back verandah. And Aziz, 'Do you know what that man was teaching your
children?' And Reverend Mother hurling question against question, 'What will you not do to bring disaster,
whatsitsname, on our heads?'-But now Aziz, 'You think it was Nastaliq script? Eh?'-to which his wife,
warming up: 'Would you eat pig? Whatsitsname? Would you spit on the Quran?' And, voice rising, the
doctor ripostes, 'Or was it some verses of 'The Cow'? You think that?'… Paying no attention, Reverend
Mother arrives at her climax: 'Would you marry your daughters to Germans!?' And pauses, fighting for
breath, letting my grandfather reveal, 'He was teaching them to hate, wife. He tells them to hate Hindus and
Buddhists and Jains and Sikhs and who knows what other vegetarians. Will you have hateful children,
woman?'
'Will you have godless ones?' Reverend Mother envisages the legions of the Archangel Gabriel
descending at night to carry her heathen brood to hell. She has vivid pictures of hell. It is as hot as Rajputana
in June and everyone is made to learn seven foreign languages… 'I take this oath, whatsitsname,' my
grandmother said, 'I swear no food will come from my kitchen to your lips! No, not one chapati, until you
bring the maulvi sahib back and kiss his, whatsitsname, feet!'
The war of starvation which began that day very nearly became a duel to the death. True to her word,
Reverend Mother did not hand her husband, at mealtimes, so much as an empty plate. Doctor Aziz took
immediate reprisals, by refusing to feed himself when he was out. Day by day the five children watched
their father disappearing, while their mother grimly guarded the dishes of food. 'Will you be able to vanish
completely?' Emerald asked with interest, adding solicitously, 'Don't do it unless you know how to come
back again.' Aziz's face acquired craters; even his nose appeared to be getting thinner. His body had become
a battlefield and each day a piece of it was blasted away. He told Alia, his eldest, the wise child: 'In any war,
the field of battle suffers worse devastation than either army. This is natural.' He began to take rickshaws
when he did his rounds. Hamdard the rickshaw-wallah began to worry about him.
The Rani of Cooch Naheen sent emissaries to plead with Reverend Mother. 'India isn't full enough of
starving people?' the emissaries asked Naseem, and she unleashed a basilisk glare which was already
becoming a legend. Hands clasped in her lap, a muslin dupatta wound miser-tight around her head, she
pierced her visitors with lidless eyes and stared them down. Their voices turned to stone; their hearts froze;
and alone in a room with strange men, my grandmother sat in triumph, surrounded by downcast eyes. 'Full
enough, whatsitsname?' she crowed. 'Well, perhaps. But also, perhaps not.'
But the truth was that Naseem Aziz was very anxious; because while Aziz's death by starvation would
be a clear demonstration of the superiority of her idea of the world over his, she was unwilling to be
widowed for a mere principle; yet she could see no way out of the situation which did not involve her in
backing down and losing face, and having learned to bare her face, my grandmother was most reluctant to
lose any of it.
'Fall ill, why don't you?'-Alia, the wise child, found the solution. Reverend Mother beat a tactical
retreat, announced a pain, a killing pain absolutely, whatsitsname, and took to her bed. In her absence Alia
extended the olive branch to her father, in the shape of a bowl of chicken soup. Two days later, Reverend
Mother rose (having refused to be examined by her husband for the first time in her life), reassumed her
powers, and with a shrug of acquiescence in her daughter's decision, passed Aziz his food as though it were
a mere trifle of a business.
That was ten years earlier; but still, in 1942, the old men at the paan-shop are stirred by the sight of the
whistling doctor into giggling memories of the time when his wife had nearly made him do a disappearing
trick, even though he didn't know how to come back. Late into the evening they nudge each other with, 'Do
you remember when-' and 'Dried up like a skeleton on a washing line! He couldn't even ride his-' and '-I tell
you, baba, that woman could do terrible things. I heard she could even dream her daughters' dreams, just to
know what they were getting up to!' But as evening settles in the nudges die away, because it is time for the
contest. Rhythmically, in silence, their jaws move; then all of a sudden there is a pursing of lips, but what
emerges is not air-made-sound. No whistle, but instead a long red jet of betel-juice passes decrepit lips, and
moves in unerring accuracy towards an old brass spittoon. There is much slapping of thighs and
self-admiring utterance of 'Wah, wah, sir!' and, 'Absolute master shot!'… Around the oldsters, the town
fades into desultory evening pastimes. Children play hoop and kabaddi and draw beards on posters of Mian
Abdullah. And now the old men place the spittoon in the street, further and further from their
squatting-place, and aim longer and longer jets at it. Still the fluid flies true. 'Oh too good, yara!' The street
urchins make a game of dodging in and out between the red streams, superimposing this game of chicken
upon the serious art of hit-the-spittoon… But here is an army staff car, scattering urchins as it comes… here,
Brigadier Dodson, the town's military commander, stifling with heat… and here, his A.D.C., Major Zulfikar,
passing him a towel. Dodson mops his face; urchins scatter; the car knocks over the spittoon. A dark red
fluid with clots in it like blood congeals like a red hand in the dust of the street and points accusingly at the
retreating power of the Raj.
Memory of a mildewing photograph (perhaps the work of the same poor brained photographer whose
life-size blow-ups so nearly cost him his life): Aadam Aziz, aglow with optimism-fever, shakes hands with a
man of sixty or so, an impatient, sprightly type with a lock of white hair falling across his brow like a kindly
scar. It is Mian Abdullah, the Hummingbird. ('You see, Doctor Sahib, I keep myself fit. You wish to hit me
in the stomach? Try, try. I'm in tiptop shape.'… In the photograph, folds of a loose white shirt conceal the
stomach, and my grandfather's fist is not clenched, but swallowed up by the hand of the ex-conjurer.) And
behind them, looking benignly on, the Rani of Cooch Naheen, who was going white in blotches, a disease
which leaked into history and erupted on an enormous scale shortly after Independence… 'I am the victim,'
the Rani whispers, through photographed lips that never move, 'the hapless victim of my cross-cultural
concerns. My skin is the outward expression of the internationalism of my spirit.' Yes, there is a
conversation going on in this photograph, as like expert ventriloquists the optimists meet their leader. Beside
the Rani-listen carefully now; history and ancestry are about to meet!-stands a peculiar fellow, soft and
paunchy, his eyes like stagnant ponds, his hair long like a poet's. Nadir Khan, the Hummingbird's personal
secretary. His feet, if they were not frozen by the snapshot, would be shuffling in embarrassment. He mouths
through his foolish, rigid smile, 'It's true; I have written verses…' Whereupon Mian Abdullah interrupts,
booming through his open mouth with glints of pointy teeth: 'But what verses! Not one rhyme in page after
page!…' And the Rani, gently: 'A modernist, then?' And Nadir, shyly: 'Yes.' What tensions there are now in
the still, immobile scene! What edgy banter, as the Hummingbird speaks: 'Never mind about that; art should
uplift; it should remind us of our glorious literary heritage!'… And is that a shadow, or a frown on his
secretary's brow?… Nadir's voice, issuing lowaslow from the fading picture: 'I do not believe in high art,
Mian Sahib. Now art must be beyond categories; my poetry and-oh-the game of hit-the-spittoon are
equals.'… So now the Rani, kind woman that she is, jokes, 'Well, I shall set aside a room, perhaps; for
paan-eating and spittoon-hittery. I have a superb silver spittoon, inlaid with lapis lazuli, and you must all
come and practise. Let the walls be splashed with our inaccurate expectorating! They will be honest stains,
at least.' And now the photograph has run out of words; now I notice, with my mind's eye, that all the while
the Hummingbird has been staring towards the door, which is past my grandfather's shoulder at the very
edge of the picture. Beyond the door, history calls. The Hummingbird is impatient to get away… but he has
been with us, and his presence has brought us two threads which will pursue me through all my days: the
thread that leads to the ghetto of the magicians; and the thread that tells the story of Nadir the rhymeless,
verbless poet and a priceless silver spittoon.
'What nonsense,' our Padma says. 'How can a picture talk? Stop now; you must be too tired to think.'
But when I say to her that Mian Abdullah had the strange trait of humming without pause, humming in a
strange way, neither musical nor unmusical, but somehow mechanical, the hum of an engine or dynamo, she
swallows it easily enough, saying judiciously, 'Well, if he was such an energetic man, it's no surprise to me.'
She's all ears again; so I warm to my theme and report that Mian Abdullah's hum rose and fell in direct
relationship to his work rate. It was a hum that could fall low enough to give you toothache, and when it rose
to its highest, most feverish pitch, it had the ability of inducing erections in anyone within its vicinity. ('Arre
baap,' Padma laughs, 'no wonder he was so popular with the men!') Nadir Khan, as his secretary, was
attacked constantly by his master's vibratory quirk, and his ears jaw penis were forever behaving according
to the dictates of the Hummingbird. Why, then, did Nadir stay, despite erections which embarrassed him in
the company of strangers, despite aching molars and a work schedule which often occupied twenty-two
hours in every twenty-four? Not-I believe-because he saw it as his poetic duty to get close to the centre of
events and transmute them into literature. Nor because he wanted fame for himself. No: but Nadir had one
thing in common with my grandfather, and it was enough. He, too, suffered from the optimism disease.
Like Aadam Aziz, like the Rani of Cooch Naheen, Nadir Khan loathed the Muslim League ('That
bunch of toadies!' the Rani cried in her silvery voice, swooping around the octaves like a skier. 'Landowners
with vested interests to protect! What do they have to do with Muslims? They go like toads to the British
and form governments for them, now mat the Congress refuses to do it!' It was the year of the 'Quit India'
resolution. 'And what's more,' the Rani said with finality, 'they are mad. Otherwise why would they want to
partition India?')
Mian Abdullah, the Hummingbird, had created the Free Islam Convocation almost single-handedly.
He invited the leaders of the dozens of Muslim splinter groups to form a loosely federated alternative to the
dogmatism and vested interests of the Leaguers. It had been a great conjuring trick, because they had all
come. That was the first Convocation, in Lahore; Agra would see the second. The marquees would be filled
with members of agrarian movements, urban labourers' syndicates, religious divines and regional groupings.
It would see confirmed what the first assembly had intimated: that the League, with its demand for a
partitioned India, spoke on nobody's behalf but its own. They have turned their backs on us,' said the
Convocation's posters, 'and now they claim we're standing behind them!' Mian Abdullah opposed the
partition.
In the throes of the optimism epidemic, the Hummingbird's patron, the Rani of Cooch Naheen, never
mentioned the clouds on the horizon. She never pointed out that Agra was a Muslim League stronghold,
saying only, 'Aadam my boy, if the Hummingbird wants to hold Convocation here, I'm not about to suggest
he goes to Allahabad.' She was bearing the entire expense of the event without complaint or interference;
not, let it be said, without making enemies in the town. The Rani did not live like other Indian princes.
Instead of teetar-hunts, she endowed scholarships. Instead of hotel scandals, she had politics. And so the
rumours began. 'These scholars of hers, man, everyone knows they have to perform extra-curricular duties.
They go to her bedroom in the dark, and she never lets them see her blotchy face, but bewitches them into
bed with her voice of a singing witch!' Aadam Aziz had never believed in witches. He enjoyed her brilliant
circle of friends who were as much at home in Persian as they were in German. But Naseem Aziz, who
half-believed the stories about the Rani, never accompanied him to the princess's house. 'If God meant
people to speak many tongues,' she argued, 'why did he put only one in our heads?'
And so it was that none of the Hummingbird's optimists were prepared for what happened. They
played hit-the-spittoon, and ignored the cracks in the earth.
Sometimes legends make reality, and become more useful than the facts. According to legend,
then-according to the polished gossip of the ancients at the paan-shop-Mian Abdullah owed his downfall to
his purchase, at Agra railway station, of a peacock-feather fan, despite Nadir Khan's warning about bad luck.
What is more, on that night of crescent moons, Abdullah had been working with Nadir, so that when the new
moon rose they both saw it through glass. 'These things matter,' the betel-chewers say. 'We have been alive
too long, and we know.' (Padma is nodding her head in agreement.)
The Convocation offices were on the ground floor of the historical faculty building at the University
campus. Abdullah and Nadir were coming to the end of their night's work; the Hummingbird's hum was
low-pitched and Nadir's teeth were on edge. There was a poster on the office wall, expressing Abdullah's
favourite anti-Partition sentiment, a quote from the poet Iqbal: 'Where can we find a land that is foreign to
God?' And now the assassins reached the campus.
Facts: Abdullah had plenty of enemies. The British attitude to him was always ambiguous. Brigadier
Dodson hadn't wanted him in town. There was a knock on the door and Nadir answered it. Six new moons
came into the room, six crescent knives held by men dressed all in black, with covered faces. Two men held
Nadir while the others moved towards the Hummingbird.
'At this point,' the betel-chewers say, 'the Hummingbird's hum became higher. Higher and higher, yara,
and the assassins' eyes became wide as their members made tents under their robes. Then-Allah, then!-the
knives began to sing and Abdullah sang louder, humming high-high like he'd never hummed before. His
body was hard and the long curved blades had trouble killing him; one broke on a rib, but the others quickly
became stained with red. But now-listen!-Abdullah's humming rose out of the range of our human ears, and
was heard by the dogs of the town. In Agra there are maybe eight thousand four hundred and twenty
pie-dogs. On that night, it is certain that some were eating, others dying; there were some who fornicated
and others who did not hear the call. Say about two thousand of these; that left six thousand four hundred
and twenty of the curs, and all of these turned and ran for the University, many of them rushing across the
railway tracks from the wrong side of town. It is well known that this is true. Everyone in town saw it,
except those who were asleep. They went noisily, like an army, and afterwards their trail was littered with
bones and dung and bits of hair… and all the time Abdullahji was humming, humming-humming, and the
knives were singing. And know this: suddenly one of the killers' eyes cracked and fell out of its socket.
Afterwards the pieces of glass were found, ground into the carpet!'
They say, 'When the dogs came Abdullah was nearly dead and the knives were blunt… they came like
wild things, leaping through the window, which had no glass because Abdullah's hum had shattered it…
they thudded against the door until the wood broke… and then they were everywhere, baba!… some without
legs, others lacking hair, but most of them had some teeth at least, and some of these were sharp… And now
see this: the assassins cannot have feared interruption, because they had posted no guards; so the dogs got
them by surprise… the two men holding Nadir Khan, that spineless one, fell beneath the weight of the
beasts, with maybe sixty-eight dogs on their necks… afterwards the killers were so badly damaged that
nobody could say who they were.'
'At some point,' they say, 'Nadir dived out of the window and ran. The dogs and assassins were too
busy to follow him.'
Dogs? Assassins?… If you don't believe me, check. Find out about Mian Abdullah and his
Convocations. Discover how we've swept his story under the carpet… then let me tell how Nadir Khan, his
lieutenant, spent three years under my family's rugs.
As a young man he had shared a room with a painter whose paintings had grown larger and larger as
he tried to get the whole of life into his art. 'Look at me,' he said before he killed himself, 'I wanted to be a
miniaturist and I've got elephantiasis instead!' The swollen events of the night of the crescent knives
reminded Nadir Khan of his room-mate, because life had once again, perversely, refused to remain
life-sized. It had turned melodramatic: and that embarrassed him.
How did Nadir Khan run across the night town without being noticed? I put it down to his being a bad
poet, and as such, a born survivor. As he ran, there was a self-consciousness about him, his body appearing
to apologize for behaving as if it were in a cheap thriller, of the sort hawkers sell on railway stations, or give
away free with bottles of green medicine that can cure colds, typhoid, impotence, homesickness and
poverty… On Cornwallis Road, it was a warm night. A coal-brazier stood empty by the deserted rickshaw
rank. The paan-shop was closed and the old men were asleep on the roof, dreaming of tomorrow's game. An
insomniac cow, idly chewing a Red and White cigarette packet, strolled by a bundled street-sleeper, which
meant he would wake in the morning, because a cow will ignore a sleeping man unless he's about to die.
Then it nuzzles at him thoughtfully. Sacred cows eat anything.
My grandfather's large old stone house, bought from the proceeds of the gemstone shops and blind
Ghani's dowry settlement, stood in the darkness, set back a dignified distance from the road. There was a
walled-in garden at the rear and by the garden door was the low outhouse rented cheaply to the family of old
Hamdard and his son Rashid the rickshaw boy. In front of the outhouse was the well with its cow-driven
waterwheel, from which irrigation channels ran down to the small cornfield which lined the house all way to
the gate in the perimeter wall along Cornwallis Road. Between house and field ran a small gully for
pedestrians and rickshaws. In Agra the cycle-rickshaw had recently replaced the kind where a man stood
between wooden shafts. There was still trade for the horse-drawn tongas, but it was dwindling… Nadir Khan
ducked in through the gate, squatted for a moment with his back to the perimeter wall, reddening as he
passed his water. Then, seemingly upset by the vulgarity of his decision, he fled to the cornfield and plunged
in. Partially concealed by the sun-withered stalks, he lay down in the foetal position.
Rashid the rickshaw boy was seventeen and on his way home from the cinema. That morning he'd
seen two men pushing a low trolley on which were mounted two enormous hand-painted posters,
back-to-back, advertising the new film Gat-Wallah, starring Rashid's favourite actor Dev. fresh from fifty
fierce weeks in delhi! STRAIGHT FROM SIXTY-THREE SHARPSHOOTER WEEKS IN bombay! the
posters cried. second rip-roarious year! The film was an eastern Western. Its hero, Dev, who was not slim,
rode the range alone. It looked very like the Indo-Gangetic plain. Gai-Wallah means cow-fellow and Dev
played a sort of one-man vigilante force for the protection of cows. single-handed! and double-barrelled!, he
stalked the many herds of cattle which were being driven across the range to the slaughterhouse, vanquished
the cattlemen and liberated the sacred beasts. (The film was made for Hindu audiences; in Delhi it had
caused riots. Muslim Leaguers had driven cows past cinemas to the slaughter, and had been mobbed.) The
songs and dances were good and there was a beautiful nautch girl who would have looked more graceful if
they hadn't made her dance in a ten-gallon cowboy hat. Rashid sat on a bench in the front stalls and joined in
the whistles and cheers. He ate two samosas, spending too much money; his mother would be hurt but he'd
had a fine time. As he pedalled his rickshaw home he practised some of the fancy riding he'd seen in the
film, hanging down low on one side, freewheeling down a slight slope, using the rickshaw the way
Gai-Wallah used his horse to conceal him from his enemies. Eventually he reached up, turned the handlebars
and to his delight the rickshaw moved sweetly through the gate and down the gully by the cornfield.
Gai-Wallah had used this trick to steal up on a gang of cattlemen as they sat in the brush, drinking and
gambling. Rashid applied the brakes and flung himself into the cornfield, running-full-tilt!-at the
unsuspecting cattlemen, his guns cocked and ready. As he neared their camp-fire he released his 'yell of hate'
to frighten them. yaaaaaaaa! Obviously he did not really shout so close to the Doctor Sahib's house, but he
distended his mouth as he ran, screaming silently. blamm! blamm! Nadir Khan had been finding sleep hard
to come by and now he opened his eyes. He saw-eeeyaaah!-a wild stringy figure coming at him like a
mail-train, yelling at the top of his voice-but maybe he had gone deaf, because there wasn't any noise!-and
he was rising to his feet, the shriek was just passing his over-plump lips, when Rashid saw him and found
voice as well. Hooting in terrified unison, they both turned tail and ran. Then they stopped, each having
noted the other's flight, and peered at one another through the shrivelling corn. Rashid recognized Nadir
Khan, saw his torn clothes and was deeply troubled.
'I am a friend,' Nadir said foolishly. 'I must see Doctor Aziz.'
'But the Doctor is asleep, and is not in the cornfield.' Pull yourself together, Rashid told himself, stop
talking nonsense! This is Mian Abdullah's friend!… But Nadir didn't seem to have noticed; his face was
working furiously, trying to get out some words which had stuck like shreds of chicken between his teeth…
'My life,' he managed it at last, 'is in danger.'
And now Rashid, still full of the spirit of Gai-Wallah, came to the rescue. He led Nadir to a door in the
side of the house. It was bolted and locked; but Rashid pulled, and the lock came away in his hand.
'Indian-made' he whispered, as if that explained everything. And, as Nadir stepped inside, Rashid hissed,
'Count on me completely, sahib. Mum's the word! I swear on my mother's grey hairs.'
He replaced the lock on the outside. To have actually saved the Hummingbird's right-hand man!… But
from what? Whom?… Well, real life was better than the pictures, sometimes.
'Is that him?' Padma asks, in some confusion. 'That fat soft cowardly plumpie? Is he going to be your
father?'
